Add episode 30 (#258)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/30.md

---
layout: episode
title:  "30: Trino and dbt, a hot data mesh"
date: 2021-11-17
tags: dbt architecture sql infrastructure datamesh
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "Trino and dbt, a hot data mesh"
     time: 0
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: "Partitioned table tests and fixed PR 9757"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the week"
     desc: "What’s the difference between location and external_location?"
     time: 0
---

## Guests

>  * José Cabeda, Data Engineer at [TalkDesk](https://www.talkdesk.com)

Reviewer: Be consistent with either `TalkDesk` or `Talkdesk`. I think it's supposed to be the latter.

 ([@jecabeda](https://twitter.com/jecabeda)).
 * Przemek Denkiewicz, Cloud Ecosystem Engineer at [Starburst](https://www.starburst.io)
  ([@hovaesco](https://twitter.com/hovaesco)).
 
## Trino Summit 2021

If you missed [Trino Summit 2021](https://www.starburst.io/resources/trino-summit/),
you can watch it on demand, for free!
 
## Release 364

Trino 364 shipped on the first of November, just after our last episode. 
Martin's official announcement mentioned the following highlights:

* Support for dynamic filtering in Iceberg connector
* Performance improvements when querying small files
* Procedure to merge small files in Hive tables
* Support for Cassandra UUID type
* Support for MemSQL datetime and timestamp types

Manfred's additional notes:

> * `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW` ... `RENAME TO`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... RENAME TO`
```

renders better.

Reviewer: Copy the requested changes from https://github.com/trinodb/trino.io/pull/255/

* A whole bunch of performance improvements
* Elasticsearch connector no longer fails with unsupported types
* A lot of improvements on Hive and Iceberg connectors
* Hive connector has optimize procedure now!
* Parquet and avro fixes and improvements
* Web UI performance improvement for long query texts

More info at <https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-364.html>.

## Concept of the week: Trino and dbt, a hot data mesh

Data mesh, the buzzword that follows data lakehouse, may feel rather irrelevant

> for many. This is especially true for those that just want to move from your 
> Hive and HDFS cluster to storing data in object store, or your favorite cloud
> data warehouse and query it with Trino.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for many. This is especially true for those that just want to move from a 
Hive and HDFS cluster to storing data in object store, or from a cloud
data warehouse and query it with Trino.
```

While data mesh is certainly in the hype cycle phase, it's actually not a new
idea and has very sound principles. Many companies have written their own 
software and created organizational policies that align with the strategies 
outlined by the data mesh principles. In essence, these principles aim to make
data management for analytics platforms decentralized. This means decentralizing
the infrastructure and data engineers managing it to different domains (or 
products) within the company.

What's really exciting about data mesh is that it's the first attempt at 
formalizing these concepts. Also, much of the technology today makes these 
theoretical principles more of a reality without having to invent your own 

> services. The author of data mesh, Zhamak Dehghani, lays out 4 principles that 

Reviewer: replace `data mesh` with the actual title (+link) of the paper/book by Zhamak.

to a data mesh. Let's see what the engineers from Talkdesk are doing to 
implement their data mesh.

### Talkdesk

Talkdesk is a contact center as a service that was created at a Twilio Hackathon
in 2011. They just hit a 10 billion dollar valuation. As a fast growing startup,
they are growing their product strategy at a fast pace and deal with a large
scale of data to run analytics over their data.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-scale.png"/><br/>
</p>

As a cloud call center, they have a heavily event-driven architecture. Dealing
with realtime events at this scale is certainly difficult and requires a 
reactive and flexible architecture.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-events.png"/><br/>
</p>

The early architecture for the analytics platform followed a more traditional
approach using Spark and Fivetran to ingest data into Redshift and had various
pipelines to update the data for downstream consumption.

This centralized workflow made communication across data entity management much

> simpler as it all exists on the same team. However, this made scaling cause 
> increased backlogs which delayed analysis and deployments. It also made it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
simpler as it all exists on the same team. However, this increased backlogs when scaling
which delayed analysis and deployments. It also made it 
```

</p>

There is a wide gap between analytics use cases and transactional use cases and 
many in between. Live data typically feeds into stateful databases that update 
as data arrives. To analyze this data in motion, you need a realtime 
database to process this data as it is inserted. Historical data exists to keep 
a backup of multiple copies of different states over time. This enables analysis
of trends over longer periods of time versus right now. How can we realize a
robust architecture that satisfies analyzing live data that gets the latest 
changes as they arrive to OLTP databases and merge it with the analytics uses?

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/olap-oltp.png"/><br/>
</p>

To do this, Talkdesk integrated Trino into their workflow to read data across
both live and historic data and merge them. This enables reading from live data
feeding into their stateful data stores, and reads across historic data stores
to produce data in the form needed to support Talkdesk products.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="90%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-architecture-2.0.png"/><br/>
</p>

> Trino uses also are used to hide the complexity of the data platform and allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino is also used to hide the complexity of the data platform and allows
```

merging data across mulitple relational and object stores.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="60%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-architecture-2.0-external.png"/><br/>
</p>

### Why dbt?

In [episode 21](/episodes/21.html) we discussed using dbt + Trino in detail. As
we mentioned there:

> dbt is a transformation workflow tool that lets teams quickly and 
> collaboratively deploy analytics code, following software engineering best 
> practices like modularity, CI/CD, testing, and documentation. It enables 
> anyone who knows SQL to build production-grade data pipelines. 

> You can achieve modularity and repeatable testable units of processing by 

Reviewer: maybe?

```suggestion
You can achieve modularity and repeatable, testable units of processing by 
```

Author: I went with:
> You can achieve modular, repeatable, and testable units of processing by 
defining various models and definitions to the data pipelines.

defining various models and definitions to the data pipelines. For example:

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/dbt-definition.png"/><br/>
</p>

> Using the definitions above, Talkdesk engineers were able to consolidate all

Reviewer: seems redundant?

```suggestion
Using the definitions above Talkdesk engineers were able to consolidate all
```

Author: Don't know why myself, but this feels correct. If I read it aloud there's a pause there.

these tasks into a much more simplified graph of operations. 

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/dbt-results.png"/><br/>
</p>

### Why data mesh?

While a lot of focus has gone into the technology aspects of data mesh, there is
also a lot to be said about the implications on the data team and sociopolitical
policies that come with data mesh. Talkdesk also made structural changes to 
their team to improve their data mesh strategy.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-data-team.png"/><br/>
</p>

### How will Data Mesh affect the everyday life of data engineers?

There is a real fear that comes around when management changes business 
policies. It can be hard to tell how these policies will trickle down and affect

> the engineer's every day work life. In general engineer's are going to become 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the engineer's every day work life. In general engineers are going to become 
```

Reviewer 2: engineers become more entrenched

Author: ufff lol sometimes my fingers just type by themselves ;p

more entrenched in different domains rather than trying to manage all domains
under one architecture. Data engineers will be distributed to product teams and 
specialize in the domain's data models and use of the self-service platform to 
integrate across other teams.

## PR of the week: Partitioned table tests and fixed PR 9757

This weeks [PR of the week](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9757)
is for the Iceberg connector. Release 364 had quite a few improvements for 
Iceberg and as we handle small issues that could cause query failure in various
niche scenarios. In scenario addressed by this PR, if we had a partition on a 
UUID column it will cause a query failure when reading that partition. 
            
Thanks to Piotr Findeisen for fixing this and many other bugs, as well as,
improving performance in the Iceberg connector!

> ## Question of the week: What’s the difference between location and external_location?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Question of the week: What’s the difference between `location` and `external_location`?
```

a backup of multiple copies of different states over time. This enables analysis
of trends over longer periods of time versus right now. How can we realize a
robust architecture that satisfies analyzing live data that gets the latest 
changes as they arrive to OLTP databases and merge it with the analytics uses?

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/olap-oltp.png"/><br/>
</p>

To do this, Talkdesk integrated Trino into their workflow to read data across
both live and historic data and merge them. This enables reading from live data
feeding into their stateful data stores, and reads across historic data stores
to produce data in the form needed to support Talkdesk products.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="90%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-architecture-2.0.png"/><br/>
</p>

Trino uses also are used to hide the complexity of the data platform and allows
merging data across mulitple relational and object stores.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="60%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-architecture-2.0-external.png"/><br/>
</p>

### Why dbt?

> In [episode 21](/episodes/21.html) we discussed using dbt + Trino in detail. As

Reviewer 2: dbt and Trino

we mentioned there:

> dbt is a transformation workflow tool that lets teams quickly and 
> collaboratively deploy analytics code, following software engineering best 
> practices like modularity, CI/CD, testing, and documentation. It enables 
> anyone who knows SQL to build production-grade data pipelines. 

You can achieve modularity and repeatable testable units of processing by 
defining various models and definitions to the data pipelines. For example:

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/dbt-definition.png"/><br/>
</p>

Using the definitions above, Talkdesk engineers were able to consolidate all
these tasks into a much more simplified graph of operations. 

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/dbt-results.png"/><br/>
</p>

### Why data mesh?

While a lot of focus has gone into the technology aspects of data mesh, there is

> also a lot to be said about the implications on the data team and sociopolitical

Reviewer 2: socio-political

policies that come with data mesh. Talkdesk also made structural changes to 
their team to improve their data mesh strategy.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="50%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/30/talkdesk-data-team.png"/><br/>
</p>

> ### How will Data Mesh affect the everyday life of data engineers?

Reviewer 2: data mesh

There is a real fear that comes around when management changes business 

> policies. It can be hard to tell how these policies will trickle down and affect

Reviewer 2: remove "will"

the engineer's every day work life. In general engineer's are going to become 
more entrenched in different domains rather than trying to manage all domains

> under one architecture. Data engineers will be distributed to product teams and 

Reviewer 2: are distributed

also break up long sentence

specialize in the domain's data models and use of the self-service platform to 
integrate across other teams.

> ### Comparing microservices based applications to the data mesh

Reviewer 2: microservices-based

> When we think of a functional system for deploying and managing microservices 

Reviewer 2: microservices-based

based applications, there are several features that we’ve come to expect from 
the platform.

> Let’s transform each of these to data mesh platform particular capabilities:

Reviewer 2: weird sentence.. reword and add empty line after

Author: I've changed it to this, I think this will clear up the following sentences: 

> It is very easy to compare the features of microservices-based 
applications to features of a data mesh

All the following bullet points were summaries of [this blog](https://blog.starburst.io/data-mesh-a-software-engineers-perspective) from Piotr. Do you suggest that we just remove these and link to the blog instead? May be better.

Reviewer 2: Yeah .. maybe thats better

> * Feature-rich operating system - self-service platform, scalable analytical SQL

Reviewer 2: sorry .. I am failing to follow here . what operating system are you talking about here

query engine that makes it very easy to consume a variety of data product, full
scalability provided by Kubernetes to meet the requirements of the heaviest
workloads providing best in class performance, JDBC and ODBC connectivity for
seamless operation with all the popular BI and ML tools.

> * Easy composition - full ANSI SQL compatibility, everyone can use well known 

Reviewer 2: what does the SQL compatibility have to do with composition

lingua franca of data

> * Easy discovery - we can use SQL information schema to easily find the 

Reviewer 2: well .. its not really easy is it..

available data products and their information, integration with data discovery 
tools

> * Authentication & authorization framework - data security and privacy is in the

Reviewer 2: Authentication and

hearth of data mesh paradigm so functionalities like RBAC, row level filtering,
data masking, OIDC/LDAP/Kerberos authentication are critical in adopting
successful data mesh principles.

> * Easy deployment - vast connectors availability and ability to do federated 

Reviewer 2: again .. how is deployment and connector availability related

queries that allows querying all the data within organisation no matter if RDBMS
or object storages or nNSQL.

> * Usage and performance metrics - access to metrics like: completed queries, avg

Reviewer 2: average

time of query execution or how often this particular query is being executed can
help tune the platform better and address users pain points.

These points were adapted from the [Data Mesh: A Software Engineer’s Perspective](https://blog.starburst.io/data-mesh-a-software-engineers-perspective)
blog.

## PR of the week: Partitioned table tests and fixed PR 9757

This weeks [PR of the week](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9757)
is for the Iceberg connector. Release 364 had quite a few improvements for 

> Iceberg and as we handle small issues that could cause query failure in various

Reviewer 2: sentence does not complete...

> niche scenarios. In scenario addressed by this PR, if we had a partition on a 

Reviewer 2: In the scenario

Reviewer 2: actually reword this
